Part 2: Understanding Design Choices

Goal: Understand FastAPI's design philosophy and how its design choices should influence the
structure of an application.

FastAPI's central idea is to use ordinary, modern Python declarations as the source of truth for
an API. A route function's type annotations and Pydantic models describe what the endpoint accepts,
what it returns, and what should appear in the generated API schema. FastAPI then connects those
declarations to parsing, validation, serialization, dependency injection, editor support, and
documentation.

1. Why use Pydantic instead of a FastAPI-specific validation system?

FastAPI chose Pydantic because it could build on a mature, focused library instead of creating and
maintaining a second validation language. Pydantic already provided several capabilities FastAPI
needed:

- Declarative models built from normal Python type annotations.
- Conversion and validation of incoming data, including nested models and constrained values.
- Clear, structured validation errors that can be returned to API clients.
- Serialization and JSON Schema generation for API contracts.
- A library that can also be used outside FastAPI, in services, command-line tools, and tests.

This separation gives each project a clear responsibility: Pydantic models describe and validate
data, while FastAPI connects those models to HTTP requests, responses, dependency resolution, and
OpenAPI. It also avoids forcing developers to learn a framework-only validation syntax. The result
is less duplicated code and a model definition that can serve as both executable validation and
documentation metadata.

Pydantic is not a replacement for business rules. A model can verify that `priority` is an integer
between 0 and 5, but a service should decide whether a particular user is allowed to change a
task's priority. Keep transport and shape validation in schemas; keep domain rules in services or
domain objects.

2. What problem does automatic API documentation solve?

An API has a contract: its paths, HTTP methods, parameters, request bodies, response bodies, and
possible errors. In many frameworks, developers had to maintain that contract separately in prose,
example files, or hand-written documentation. Those documents could become incomplete or drift away
from the implementation whenever a route changed.

FastAPI generates an OpenAPI schema from the same route signatures, type hints, Pydantic models, and
response declarations used to run the application. Swagger UI and ReDoc then present that schema
as interactive documentation. This addresses three practical problems:

- Accuracy: the documented request and response shapes are derived from application code.
- Discoverability: developers can inspect and try endpoints without first reading the entire codebase.
- Integration: OpenAPI can support client generation, contract checks, and tooling for API consumers.

Automatic documentation does not eliminate design decisions or testing. It documents what the code
declares, so vague models, missing response models, and undocumented business behavior still need
attention. It does make the route declaration a useful, visible API contract instead of a separate
piece of documentation that must be synchronized manually.

3. Why use type hints so extensively?

FastAPI uses type hints because they are already part of Python and can serve several purposes at
once. For example:

		@app.get("/tasks/{task_id}", response_model=TaskResponse)
		async def get_task(task_id: int, limit: int = 20) -> TaskResponse:
				...

From this declaration, FastAPI and its surrounding tools can infer that:

- `task_id` is a path value that should be parsed as an integer.
- `limit` is a query value with an integer type and a default.
- The endpoint returns the `TaskResponse` shape.
- The editor and static type checker can provide completion and detect mismatches.
- OpenAPI documentation can describe the endpoint without a second schema language.

This creates a single source of truth and makes the function signature communicate its contract to
both humans and tools. Type hints also improve refactoring, code review, test readability, and the
ability to recognize incorrect values before runtime.

Type hints are not magic correctness guarantees. They do not check authorization, database state,
or every business invariant. Use Pydantic constraints and explicit service logic for runtime rules,
and use a type checker when static analysis is valuable.

4. Why an async-first approach?

FastAPI was designed around ASGI and asynchronous I/O because modern APIs often spend much of their
time waiting for external systems: databases, HTTP services, queues, files, and clients. With
appropriate async libraries, one process can continue handling other requests while one operation
is waiting. This can improve throughput and responsiveness for I/O-heavy workloads.

Flask grew around the synchronous WSGI model, where a request generally occupies a worker while the
handler runs. Synchronous code is still useful and often simpler, especially for CPU-bound work or
applications using synchronous libraries. FastAPI supports regular `def` path operations too, but
an `async def` handler should use non-blocking libraries for the work it awaits. Calling a blocking
database or HTTP client directly from an async handler can undermine the benefit of the async model.

The motivation was not that asynchronous code is always faster. It was to make concurrent I/O a
first-class path while supporting the broader ASGI ecosystem, including WebSockets and long-lived
connections. Choose async when the workload and dependencies benefit from it; do not add `async`
merely as decoration.

5. How the philosophy should shape application structure

FastAPI's design encourages explicit boundaries and thin HTTP layers:

- Put request and response contracts in Pydantic schemas. Use separate input and output models when
	clients may submit different fields from those the API returns.
- Keep route functions focused on HTTP translation: receive validated values, call a service, and
	return a declared response.
- Put business rules in services or domain objects rather than hiding them in route declarations or
	Pydantic field validators.
- Group related endpoints in `APIRouter` modules and include those routers from the application
	entry point.
- Use `Depends()` for reusable route-level requirements such as authentication, database sessions,
	and service construction. Use middleware for behavior that should wrap most or all requests.
- Select async database, HTTP, and messaging libraries when handlers are asynchronous. Keep blocking
	work out of the event loop, or isolate it deliberately.
- Treat the generated OpenAPI document as a contract. Test success cases, validation failures,
	authorization failures, and response shapes rather than relying on documentation alone.

A useful mental model is:

		HTTP request -> typed parameter resolution -> Pydantic validation -> route -> service ->
		declared response model -> OpenAPI-described response

In short, FastAPI favors composition over a large built-in application stack. It uses established
Python tools, explicit types, and an ASGI runtime to make API contracts visible and reusable. The
tradeoff is that you must choose and structure your own database, authentication, migrations, and
business layers. A well-structured FastAPI application keeps those choices explicit instead of
letting framework magic or unvalidated dictionaries spread across the codebase.

